our next speaker um is someone that I'm
really excited about and someone who
I've had the opportunity to work with
and get to know here at gray area um
Chia amisola is a former member of our
culture cultural incubator um and we
were able to present their Monumental
performative work uh my computer never
asks me how many computers I had before
uh this summer at gray area um yeah
think about that one for a second um
Chia is an internet and ambient artist
from Manila Philippines amidst a
postcolonial internet of extremes their
website specific art sites poetry Games
social networks archives and tools posit
self-preservation as communal
preservation creation as synonymous with
Liberation and identity as a source of
infrastructure building I'm so excited
for you guys to hear what she has to say
[Applause]
[Music]
it's May 4
2000 a few days after I was
born an email with the subject I love
you is sent on a Friday morning to
Singapore attached to it the file love
letter for you. text.
VBS and it spreads to Hong Kong China
scattering across Europe slamming the
United
States when the file clicks it
begins overriding deleting scrambling
erasing we're 50 million computers are
infected $15 billion doll are spent
removing
[Music]
it one of the most infamous computer
viruses in history the I love you virus
was made by onel dezman he was a
Filipino college student um who was
struggling to pay for dialup internet
and wanted to collect passwords for
those who didn't have access like
him I'm Chia
misala I was born and raised in the
Philippines in tond Manila I'm 24 now
I'm the same age as kuel when he made
the
virus my art practice is concerned with
the third world internet's loss its love
its
labor and its
Liberation specifically in Filipino
solidarities in our struggle for
self-determination in form I often make
websites as worlds games durational
performances play with
sound think about sites in the internet
as an environment that I can build and
make Tracing Our intimacy within them
from the domestic to the
Divine anal Gman as an artist is an
artist who works with the internet just
like
me on El's creation of the I love you
virus speaks to how embedded the
Filipino is with
technology driven from Material crisis
and systems that had failed
him an exploitation of technologies that
made the invisible Philippines visible
suddenly as he was clawing for
Access when I look back to this event I
think the victims weren't just those
affected by the virus
systems are only vulnerable because
people
are even in anel's naive exploitation of
longing and loneliness speaking to
everything that we want we
need I'm just like
him in his work suddenly our once
isolated archipelago was once
seen I'll be speaking to you about third
world internet
art Beyond this need for visibility and
the end of endless exploitation and
extraction I want to drill in the
question must we sing suffer andplay
ourselves to be
seen must we always fight for
visibility can we one day have the
privilege of
invisibility without our
eraser Beyond
technology associated with domination
and control there is narrative about
what it means to just exist to
struggle here we already are with our
own modes of agency our own
stewardship and making of the
[Music]
world this is what I got for using the
computer um computer Mayan is talog for
something like that's what you get for
using the computer it's like something
your mom would shout at you if you're
online too
much um and it's also the title of an
exhibition of filipin Internet art that
I independently curated produced and
have been developing over the past year
the exhibition gathers 20 Filipinos um
who are presenting browser-based work um
website software Games videos all made
for the browser articulating the
Filipino condition our tensions with
online existing inform as a never-ending
karaoke party and and some other um
familiar technological
forums um the project has been pretty
unique and Incredibly long long running
mostly because I've served as a close
development partner with a lot of the
artist um for most of the work um with
many of them making something for the
browser for the first time um making
more independent Standalone websites or
software interventions for the first
time so the work I speak of when I speak
of the third will internet is not my own
it is shared with all these Filipino
artists
um with third world's digital existence
visibility is often tied to resistance
especially when contextualized within
how Filipino bodies often
serve as the labor and are the very
infrastructure that powers much of the
internet with our land bodies
continuously
seized I wonder what it means when now
our counternarratives are given
space I just came back from a few weeks
in Manila where we installed dran
celebrated with a weekend of programming
and I'm going to share a few fragments
of just like three pieces from the
exhibition um share some Reflections on
the themes that these artists have been
speaking to and talk about how they're
gesturing
towards this promise and struggle
towards an archipelagic
internet um I won't do these pieces
justice but I will try with us being an
island once in
and at the periphery at the edges of the
world now perhaps coming to your
attention coming
[Music]
alive how do we move through the
web responding to possibilities of
agency movement and the bridging that
the internet offers us perhaps there's a
way to live within it and reclaim the
internet from its militant origins or at
least emphasize how we struggle against
it um this is one of the pieces Leon
lius every state as a whole that speaks
to a culture of Crisis as circulated by
software and post-apocalyptic Aesthetics
beginning with his research into tribal
tattoos also it's moving really fast
because it progresses by Text to Speech
but I'm not playing that out cu it's
super loud and annoying um he linked
symbols of mysticism and Indigenous
tribes um as they found their way onto
modded PC cases um he goes through boot
lugging MMO MMO RPGs um people on
motorcycles shooting you in the
Philippines just normal stuff to him
culture is Clockwork perhaps A Clockwork
that has been overclocked overdriven
stretched out um this piece was
originally in the form of a Zen that
Leon had developed many years back
um and we developed it into this
infinitely generative play where
excerpts from his nonlinear text um kind
of appear and jumble together line by
line assembling themselves into new
paragraphs and commentaries um in these
different
chapters given the multiplicity of
voices in Leon's content the text to
speech if it was audible voices switch
accordingly as well often diverging
splitting speeding by chance forming new
paragraphs and
texts originally tribal tattoos were
supposed to tell you where you come from
and where you're
going I believe tribal designs visualize
a discontinuous and uneven model of time
associated with an archaic past it also
represents speed and Future
these are codes from Leon's work science
used to have meaning the data we carried
with us helped move us from one place to
another it was once a part of us not
just extension of
us the internet has dried out its Seas
Barren and monolithic now our routes and
spaces online are
disappearing Leon finds that these
tribal Aesthetics are now built into
Graphics Hardware heat intertwined with
image
exhaust and imprint for data soon will
we still need our
skin there are no more bodies we're just
information how do we embody and flesh
knowledge floating
online every click stutter
lag what are the implications of
translations by bodies removed from
specific contexts
these are some of the questions posed by
the artist Isola Tong um as she
assembled her work vessels of
Disappearing craft she's currently based
in the Philippines um but previously
wasn't too far away um she took her
master's program at UC Santa Cruz um in
this hand curated selection of YouTube
videos of craft based craft-based
tutorials weaved into a benig like
pattern a benig being one of the
traditional handwoven mats of the
Philippines the player ends up up
somewhat
frayed feeling almost pixelated just as
the actual physical objects
do the videos are intentionally spaced
some seconds apart to indicate where
lag the movement of
time we're thinking about how the
internet both carries and safeguards
knowledge but also an overreliance on it
ends up destroying
knowledge isa's work speaks to an
urgency in relearning our responsib
ility for example for those in urban
Manila like where I'm from to look
towards these provincial peripheral
practices that had to be abandoned for
hopes of mobility and to how these
necessary Notions of mobility and
progress have led us to immense cultural
loss but what can we do when this
Mobility is necessary for
survival when the land we used to live
on has been erased when there are no
options for us but to lose ourselves
I've been wondering what it means to
become a vessel ourselves just as the
computer in itself too is a disappearing
vessel futile and holding these YouTube
videos and might be one day taken
down a platform that won't be here
forever looking back to Leon's work
perhaps flesh might have more permanence
than we
think that we undermine always the
computational power of our
bodies when Phil
often serve as the computational power
of the technologies that we
know and the digital might provide a
unique access to
flesh one or physical conditions
otherwise
wouldn't into induc a period by beatric
cabia
we click and scroll through an
infinitely generated Filipino abortion
Forum um where every thread that you
land on um is sourced from creative
pieces from her college thesis um these
are the only threads that are ever
opened up but we scraped and mixed um
the actual content from real forums that
she had to go through um
herself in a country where abortion is
illegal and about a million abortions
are induced annually one of the most
reliable ways of accessing these
procedures is through online sellers um
often
on Spaces like this where you're
anonymized less tied to your real
identity these online spaces also end up
being the most emotionally secure and
welcoming offering women a space offline
the practice is heavily socially
stigmatized especially from close family
members propelled by religious and legal
fears
here's the line between the emancipatory
potential of the web
how in the offline where we are isolated
sometimes the online does free
us these are just three of the 20
projects that are available
um oness exhibition that will also be
online soon um all that speak to erasing
this impossible boundary between the
Filipina and the technology we've been
enclosed around our whole lives the
technology that is inseparable of us
that becomes
us lately I've been wondering what it
means to consider ourselves as
interfaces I often consider myself as
one when I do my web work perhaps the
Filipino body is the technology itself
the essential interface struggling and
wet and glistening after all similarly
our making of religion also forced by
colonialization has ended up imbuing and
embedding many environmental and animist
ways of being being rituals and our
reinterpretation of it might technology
be the same could even consider prayer
itself as a
technology my personal work has been in
considering the internet's ambiences
reconfiguring what we consider
environmental which means what we deem
As
Natural another artist in the exhibition
um who's actually giving a workshop at
the festival tomorrow and might be here
um angelene miter
um has a project as well that builds
upon the Philippine builds upon Filipino
mythologies to make sense of the web in
their piece into the jaws of the Horizon
the internet is imagined as another
physical layer of the universe with
overse Filipinos overseas Filipino
workers Bing data centers now the
internet is wedged between the
underworld Earth and Sky world of
Philipino
mythology of course the third world has
always stewarded and experienced
infrastructural difference ly to us it
is literal physical visceral I don't
mean this solely in our contemporary
understanding of the digital but in
centuries of existence predicated on the
extraction of our bodies labor
identities land it just so happens that
this land today now extends to the to
the
digital amidst all this then where then
are the pockets of intimacy meaning
Gathering is there a way to facilitate
interdependence
um I'll speak briefly about the two kind
of like setups we had for installation
in Manila um kind of speak to the
material interfaces in which we actually
engage with technology um one set for
one of the setups setups for kak mean
was this ponet setup which are these
vending machine like PCS Coin Operated
for very very cheap pennies um they sell
access to the internet for like four
minutes at a time for like a single
Philippine PESA fitting with the rest of
the Country sachche economy um with
internet internet costs being incredibly
prohibitive so you're probably familiar
with internet cafes but this is like the
new thing this is an even more
accessible cheaper version um that has
actually led to a lot of internet cafe
shutdowns so I bought this machine I
don't know if this picture is clear but
has like a League of Legends decal on it
so I'm pretty proud of it I got for
$20 okay you can't see it here but it
says League of
Legends um even this space mean and
means to access technology such a
privilege vending machines in the
Philippines approximate what ubiquitous
devices like mobile phones and internet
access provide us um and just as the
exhibition itself is structured like a
karoke party um we did have a karaoke
machine um where the pieces exist in
many forms in a desktop in this remote
controlled one in print and the karoke
to me is so interesting where it
questions How We Gather the line between
the public and private between performer
and audience all these
negotiations here in every witness in
person is part of the
performance when I asked must we sing I
wanted to find a state of optionality
that is also representative of agency
where we can also choose to step aside
to not be performer and still influence
be part of the system be part of these
gatherings and in addition to these
positions of s um is questions again of
Empire and domination and where we get
our Technologies
from karaoke itself invented in Japan
that occupi the Philippines a form of
soft power a control of what we find as
um desirable us learning how to
imitate positioning us in to whiteness
in
English inhabiting dwelling within and
Reinventing ourselves through this
constant reidentification is perhaps
what it means to be a technological body
to be a
Filipino I think to preserve my nation
as it has lived and died on the internet
might be my life's
work and what is of urgency to me is to
continue moving towards a notion of an
archipelagic Internet that we are
shaping in our very present
one that might be characterized by its
glitchiness all the accidentals its lag
its
hypertextuality an in inability to be
compressed when I hold up the experience
of third world internet art I want to
reject this need for being a form of
high technology for being new a need of
for dominance or the need to even
rewrite the past to reject claims that
are imaginaries too constrained when our
struggle that we actively experience
every day testifies to anything but we
have made the internet our own in many
ways there's an Internet that is not
yours not everyone deserves this heat
can survive in it but we have to regain
a sense of our
interdependence by making and reclaiming
space against the web and its notion and
its Tendencies to collapse space time
and memory against the flattening of the
internet
here we are within an Internet that has
been weaponized against us since our
Inception and also the knowledge that it
carries so much of me and my
people there's the knowledge that there
does exist the conditions for
solidarity the potential for
assistance and if there isn't any proof
of this it is in our persisting
existence I suppose
this is what I got for using the
computer okay thank
[Applause]
you Chia wow thank you so much for that
uh beautiful talk and performance um
this is a really exciting and new newer
body of work for you that has been
developing you just had this show open
in the Philippines and so it's so
exciting it feels so fresh um one thing
that you know comes to mind to me
watching this and and and really trying
to understand like the texture of your
experience you know how does it feel you
know coming from Manila to be working
with the third world internet or the
Filipino internet in the shadow of
Silicon Valley here in you know kind of
the belly of the Beast what has that
experience been like for you and has it
been difficult to to
navigate yeah it's been especially
challenging um I me I was born and
raised in Manila my whole life and I'm
just temporarily here um got a
scholarship to study in the US and now
work in Tech obviously like why else am
I in San Francisco um
and it's expensive here um so a lot of
my life has been now and in the past
years has been like contending
with how
I morally against um I am with against
like much of the industry against much
of the options of like what it means to
succeed here um and a lot of my past
years I've also been finding a lot in
learning about even internet art and the
web as a medium at all so kak computer
man is kind of just giving to more
people what I was learning through when
I came to the Western world and
understood that oh this space that I've
been enclosed around my whole life is
like an artistic medium these websites
I'm making since I was a child are like
incredible and radical and kind of like
speak to me and eventually my nation so
um there's not like when I think about
what I do for the Philippines and for
third world internet artists um it's not
about like bringing something new or
teaching them like something new I don't
think I have much to bring them but
helping kind of like but but to be
alongside them and to together situate
ourselves and kind of like understand
and articulate that what we are doing
and what we're making and what we're
exploiting is already like art and is a
practice of resistance Etc absolutely
and I think that something that also
really speaks to me about your work is
the way that you're able to use
something like an Internet Protocol or a
web browser these kind of like what we
assume to be work spaces or corporate
spaces or like a SE or like clinical
spaces um and you create experiences and
you create artwork in your personal
practice that bridges that divide and
creates deep moments of intimacy and
resonance with the audience and I'm
wondering a littleit if you could speak
just a little bit about your
relationship to uh web the Poetics of
the web something that we've talked
about before in the past how do you how
do you want to create an experience for
your viewer and what sort of ways can
you use the browser use the language of
the web to to build that intimacy
yeah um the way I give presentations and
the way I make a lot of my work is
basically just finding some mechanic of
the browser um or our languages and just
like kind of exploiting that or toying
around with it um and a lot of them um
are like old or not new um which makes
the work sometimes to be seen as
nostalgic but is more to me about just
like making visible like what are the
protocols today um and allowing the work
to evolve and rot as these standards
change and thought making work that is
very temporal um a lot of the desires to
like work with these kind of like aects
and affordances of the browser probably
come from
like I don't know just like having made
websites for a very long time having
always understood them as a way to
fragment myself as an extension of
myself um as something that I could fill
and it is the most maybe comfortable
environment for me and also the most
accessible um where like it's not just
the Phil but people today are so in
mesed in like what the browser should
serve as or how it should operate and
never attempts to like contest it any
longer yeah wonderful thank you so much
Chia we're always so pleased to have you
um